DOCS-336 lead examples with app router (#381)
clerkinc/clerk-docs: docs/quickstarts/nextjs.mdx

With this middleware, your entire application is protected. If you try to access it, the middleware will redirect you to your Sign Up page. If you want to make other routes public, check out the [authMiddleware reference page](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware).

### Build your own sign-in and sign-up pages

> At this point, your application is fully protected by Clerk and uses Clerk's [Account Portal](/docs/account-portal/overview) pages that are available out of the box. You can start your Next.js application via `npm run dev`, visit `http://localhost:3000`, and sign up to get access to your application. 

Reviewer: 💭 I feel like this paragraph makes more sense in the previous section.

Reviewer 2: We used to have it as a Callout in the above section, but I moved it down. My thinking was that it ties in with the next paragraph and and why you may or may not need your own sign-in/sign-up routes. The Callout seemed to get missed by many customers. I can certainly move it up.

### Server side

#### App Router

> [`auth()`][auth-ref] and [`currentUser()`][currentuser-ref] are new helpers that you can use inside of your Route Handlers, middleware, Server Components, and Server Actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`auth()`][auth-ref] and [`currentUser()`][currentuser-ref] are App Router-specific helpers that you can use inside of your Route Handlers, middleware, Server Components, and Server Actions.

```

> The [`auth()`][auth-ref] helper will return the [`Authentication`](/docs/references/nextjs/authentication-object) object of the currently active user. Since request data like `headers()` and `cookies()` is now available in the global scope for Next.js, you no longer need to explicitly pass a `Request` object to Clerk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`auth()`][auth-ref] helper will return the [`Authentication`](/docs/references/nextjs/authentication-object) object of the currently active user. Now that request data is available in the global scope through Next.js's `headers()` and `cookies()` methods, passing the request object to Clerk is no longer required.
```

The [`currentUser()`][currentuser-ref] helper will return the [`User`][user-object] object of the currently active user. This is helpful if you want to render information, like their first and last name, directly from the server.

<Callout type="info">
  Any requests from a Client Component to a Route Handler will automatically include the user's current token as the Bearer token.
</Callout>

<Tabs items={["Route Handler", "Route Handler w/ User Fetch"]}>
  <Tab>

>     You can protect your API routes by using the [`auth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth) helper, if the route is not protected by [middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this statement is fully accurate. As far as I know, `auth()` requires the middleware to have executed. Is there a way we can clarify this?

Reviewer 2: This is correct, actually. I added that too quickly thinking of a reason we are checking userId when we have middleware. I'll clean it up, maybe change the example.

Reviewer: @royanger just a gentle reminder to tweak this wording 👀

Reviewer 2: @BRKalow -- 100%. Was waiting on storing out a few other issues then was going to do on larger edit on this.

    ```tsx filename="app/api/user/route.[jsx/tsx]"
    import { NextResponse } from 'next/server';
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs';

>     export async function GET(req: Request, res: NextResponse) {

Author: ```suggestion
    export async function GET() {

```

      const { userId } = auth();

      if (!userId) {
        return new NextResponse("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
      }

      // Perform your Route Handler's logic

      return NextResponse.json({ userId }, { status: 200 });
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
    You can protect your API routes by using the [`auth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth) helper, if the route is not protected by [middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

    In some cases, you may need the full [`User`][user-object] object. For example, if you want to access the user's email address address or name, you can use  [`currentUser()`](/docs/references/nextjs/current-user) helper to get the full [`User`][user-object] object. Under the hood, this calls `fetch()` so it is automatically deduped per request.

   ```tsx filename="app/api/user/route.ts"
    import { NextResponse } from 'next/server';
    import { currentUser, auth } from "@clerk/nextjs";

>     export async function GET(req: Request, res: NextResponse) {

Author: ```suggestion
    export async function GET() {

```

      const { userId } = auth();

      if (!userId) {
        return new NextResponse("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
      }

>       const user = await currentUser();

Author: should we being doing something like

```
const user = currentUser();

if (!user) { return new NextResponse("Unauthorized", { status: 401 }) }

// Perform Route Handler logic with the returned user object
```

Reviewer 2: I was mulling that over, versus keeping some use of auth() in the example. We have the other tab though so this is fine.

      // Perform your Route Handler's logic with the returned user object

      return NextResponse.json({ "user": user }, { status: 200 })
    }
  ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

#### Pages Router

<Tabs items={["API Route", "API Route w/ User Fetch", "getServerSideProps"]}>
  <Tab>
    For Next.js apps using the Pages Router, you can protect your API routes by using the [`getAuth`](/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) helper and retrieve data from your own systems.

    ```tsx filename="pages/api/auth.ts"
    import type { NextApiRequest, NextApiResponse } from "next";
    import { getAuth } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";

    export default function handler(req: NextApiRequest, res: NextApiResponse) {
      const { userId } = getAuth(req);

      if (!userId) {
        return res.status(401).json({ error: "Unauthorized" });
      }

      // retrieve data from your database
  
      res.status(200).json({});
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>

>     For Next.js apps using the Pages Router, you can protect your API routes by using the [`getAuth`](/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) helper and retrieve data from your own systems.

Reviewer: What do we mean by "and retrieve data from your own systems"?

Reviewer 2: That was from the previous version. I'll revise.

Reviewer: Reminder to revise this wording 👀

### Server side

#### App Router

> [`auth()`][auth-ref] and [`currentUser()`][currentuser-ref] are App Router-specific helpers that you can use inside of your Route Handlers, middleware, Server Components, and Server Actions.

Reviewer: nit: Middleware is capitalized in the Next.js docs 👀 

```suggestion
[`auth()`][auth-ref] and [`currentUser()`][currentuser-ref] are App Router-specific helpers that you can use inside of your Route Handlers, Middleware, Server Components, and Server Actions.

```

Reviewer 2: I don't mind this change, but we use 'middleware' everywhere in the docs so we should probably do a docs wide pass.

The [`currentUser()`][currentuser-ref] helper will return the [`User`][user-object] object of the currently active user. This is helpful if you want to render information, like their first and last name, directly from the server.

<Callout type="info">
  Any requests from a Client Component to a Route Handler will automatically include the user's current token as the Bearer token.
</Callout>

<Tabs items={["Route Handler", "Route Handler w/ User Fetch"]}>
  <Tab>
    You can protect your API routes by using the [`auth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth) helper, if the route is not protected by [middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

    ```tsx filename="app/api/user/route.[jsx/tsx]"
    import { NextResponse } from 'next/server';
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs';

    export async function GET() {

      const { userId } = auth();

      if (!userId) {
        return new NextResponse("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
      }

      // Perform your Route Handler's logic

      return NextResponse.json({ userId }, { status: 200 });
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>

>     You can protect your API routes by using the [`auth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth) helper, if the route is not protected by [middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

Reviewer: We also need to update this wording to be accurate, as `auth()` relies on the middleware executing.

  Any requests from a Client Component to a Route Handler will automatically include the user's current token as the Bearer token.
</Callout>

<Tabs items={["Server components and actions", "Route Handler", "Route Handler w/ User Fetch"]}>
  <Tab>
      Clerk has introduced new [`auth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth) and [`currentUser()`](/docs/references/nextjs/current-user) helpers for use in server components and server actions. The `auth()` helper returns the [`Authentication` Object](/docs/references/nextjs/authentication-object) status of the user. The `currentUser()` helper loads the [`User`][user-object] object for the authenticated user. This is helpful if you want to render information, like their first and last name, directly from the server.

    Under the hood, `currentUser()` uses the `clerkClient` wrapper to make a call to Clerk's Backend API. This does count towards the [Backend API Request Rate Limit](/docs/backend-requests/resources/rate-limits#rate-limits). This also uses `fetch()` so it is automatically deduped per request.

    ```tsx filename="app/page.tsx"
    import { auth, currentUser } from "@clerk/nextjs";

    export default async function Page() {

>       // Get the userId from auth() -- if null the user is not logged in

Reviewer 2: There are a bunch of optional paths here. 

- the `if (!userId) {|` for stopping route access is if the route is both handled by Middleware and the route is in publicRoutes. The dev should be leaning on Middleware for this typically, but it is an option.
- usually the `if (!userId) {}` check is to restrict or display certain content to a logged in user. IE, a 'submit review' or 'edit' button.
- the more frequent reason to grab the userId is to then use that for some sort of DB/CMS query to get user specific information for that component. 
```js
  const { userId: id } = auth()
  const contacts = await getContacts(userId)
```
- the dev might have added sessionClaims to the session, which would be avaialable on `auth()`. Not quite specific to this question, but adjacent.
```js
  const { sessionsClaims } = auth()
```  
- if the dev needs customer information they can reach for currentUser immediately. `currentUser()` includes a userId as well
```js
  const user = await currentUser()
  if ( user.id ) {}
```

This is so much info to try and impart in a quickstart and its about narrowing it down. Previous docs did the the whole auth check that Middleawere should be doing, but I think we should move off that. Maybe we change the auth() to something like:

```
if (userId) {
  // query DB for user specific information or display assets only to logged in users 
}

```

>       // Get the userId from auth() -- if null the user is not logged in

Author: okay this makes sense! if its a public route, or the authorization is handled by middleware, we don't have to do it here.
but why do we grab the userId from auth() then? we don't do anything with it.

>       // Get the userId from auth() -- if null the user is not logged in

Reviewer 2: Yup, you're right. That's why I suggested that last bit.

```js
if (userId) {
  // query DB for user specific information or display assets only to logged in users 
}
```

>       // Get the userId from auth() -- if null the user is not logged in

Reviewer 2: Let me just do a commit real quick.

      const { userId } = auth();

      // Get the User object when you need access to the user's information
      const user = await currentUser()
      // ...
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>

>     A Route Handler added to [`publicRoutes`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware#making-pages-public-using-public-routes) can still use the [`auth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth) helper to return information about the user or their authentication state, or to control access to some or all of the Route Handler. The `auth()` helper does require [Middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

Reviewer 2: We can definitely add it there. It should probably be here given this is the quickstart so they are likely reading this first. I didn't see this question -- sorry if I missed it.

    ```tsx filename="app/api/user/route.[jsx/tsx]"
    import { NextResponse } from 'next/server';
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs';

    export async function GET() {

      const { userId } = auth();

      if (!userId) {
        return new NextResponse("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
      }

      // Perform your Route Handler's logic

      return NextResponse.json({ userId }, { status: 200 });
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
    A Route Handler added to [`publicRoutes`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware#making-pages-public-using-public-routes) can still use the [`auth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth) helper to return information about the user or their authentication state, or to control access to some or all of the Route Handler. The `auth()` helper does require [Middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

>     In some cases, you may need the full [`User`][user-object] object. For example, if you want to access the user's email address address or name, you can use  [`currentUser()`](/docs/references/nextjs/current-user) helper to get the full [`User`][user-object] object. Under the hood, this calls `fetch()` so it is automatically deduped per request.

Author: ```suggestion
    In some cases, you may need the full [`User`][user-object] object to retrieve information such as the user's email address or name. You can access the [`User`][user-object] object by using the [`currentUser()`](/docs/references/nextjs/current-user) helper. Under the hood, this helper calls `fetch()` so it is automatically deduped per request.

```

   ```tsx filename="app/api/user/route.ts"
    import { NextResponse } from 'next/server';
    import { currentUser, auth } from "@clerk/nextjs";

    export async function GET() {

      const { userId } = auth();

      if (!userId) {
        return new NextResponse("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
      }

      const user = await currentUser();

      // Perform your Route Handler's logic with the returned user object

      return NextResponse.json({ "user": user }, { status: 200 })
    }
  ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

#### Pages Router

<Tabs items={["API Route", "API Route w/ User Fetch", "getServerSideProps"]}>
  <Tab>

>     For Next.js applications using the Pages Router, you can get user information or authentication state, or control access to some or all of your API routes by using the [`getAuth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) helper. The `getAuth()` helper does require [Middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

Author: ```suggestion
    For Next.js applications using the Pages Router, you can retrieve information about the user and their authentication state, or control access to some or all of your API routes by using the [`getAuth()`][get-auth] helper. The [`getAuth()`][get-auth] helper does require [Middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

```

    ```tsx filename="pages/api/auth.ts"
    import type { NextApiRequest, NextApiResponse } from "next";
    import { getAuth } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";

    export default function handler(req: NextApiRequest, res: NextApiResponse) {
      const { userId } = getAuth(req);

      if (!userId) {
        return res.status(401).json({ error: "Unauthorized" });
      }

      // retrieve data from your database
  
      res.status(200).json({});
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>

>     For Next.js applications using the Pages Router, you can get user information or authentication state, or control access to some or all of your API routes by using the [`getAuth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) helper. The `getAuth()` helper does require [Middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

Author: ```suggestion
    For Next.js applications using the Pages Router, you can retrieve information about the user and their authentication state, or control access to some or all of your API routes by using the [`getAuth()`][get-auth] helper. The [`getAuth()`][get-auth] helper does require [Middleware](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware). 

```

>     In some cases, you may need the full [`User`][user-object] object. For example, if you want to access the user's email address address or name, you can use the [`clerkClient`](/docs/references/backend/overview) helper to get the full [`User`][user-object] object.

Author: ```suggestion
    In some cases, you may need the full [`User`][user-object] object. For example, if you want to access the user's email address address or name, you can use the [`clerkClient`][clerk-client] helper to get the full [`User`][user-object] object.

```

    ```tsx filename="pages/api/auth.ts"
    import { clerkClient } from "@clerk/nextjs";
    import { getAuth } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";
    import type { NextApiRequest, NextApiResponse } from "next";

    export default async function handler(
      req: NextApiRequest,
      res: NextApiResponse
    ) {
      const { userId } = getAuth(req);

      if (!userId) {
        return res.status(401).json({ error: "Unauthorized" });
      }

      const user = userId ? await clerkClient.users.getUser(userId) : null;

      // use the user object to decide what data to return

      return res.status(200).json({});
    }
    ```
  </Tab>

  <Tab>

>     You can access the active session and user data in your `getServerSideProps` using the [`getAuth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) helper.

Author: ```suggestion
    You can access the active session and user data in your `getServerSideProps` using the [`getAuth()`][get-auth] helper.

```

    You can access the active session and user data in your `getServerSideProps` using the [`getAuth`](/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) helper.

    <Callout type="info" emoji="ℹ️">

>       Please note the addition of `buildClerkProps` in the return statement, which informs our React helpers of the authentication state during server-side rendering (like `useAuth()`, `<SignedIn>`, and `<SignedOut>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Please note the addition of `buildClerkProps` in the return statement, which informs the Clerk React helpers of the authentication state during server-side rendering (like `useAuth()`, `<SignedIn>`, and `<SignedOut>`).

```

      }

      // Load any data your application needs for the page using the userId

      return { props: { ...buildClerkProps(ctx.req) } };
    };
    ```

>     You can also access the full [`User`][user-object] object before passing it to the page by using the `clerkClient` helper.

Author: ```suggestion
    You can also access the full [`User`][user-object] object before passing it to the page by using the [`clerkClient`][clerk-client] helper.

```

    <Cards title="Next.js SDK Reference" description="Learn more about additional Next.js methods." link="/docs/references/nextjs/overview" cta="Learn More" />
  </div>
</div>

[clerk-provider]: /docs/components/clerk-provider
[user-object]: /docs/references/javascript/user/user
[auth-ref]: /docs/references/nextjs/auth

> [currentuser-ref]: /docs/references/nextjs/current-user

Author: ```suggestion
[currentuser-ref]: /docs/references/nextjs/current-user
[get-auth]: /docs/references/nextjs/get-auth
[clerk-client]: /docs/references/backend/overview
```
